Project Gutenberg's Les règles de Cicco Simonetta, by Francesco Simonetta

This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere at no cost and with
almost no restrictions whatsoever.  You may copy it, give it away or
re-use it under the terms of the Project Gutenberg License included
with this eBook or online at www.gutenberg.org


Title: Les règles de Cicco Simonetta
       pour le déchiffrement des écritures secrètes

Author: Francesco Simonetta

Editor: Paul-Michel Perret

Release Date: March 1, 2009 [EBook #28227]

Language: French

Character set encoding: ISO-8859-1

*** START OF THIS PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK LES RÈGLES DE CICCO SIMONETTA ***




Produced by Laurent Vogel, Christine P. Travers and the
Online Distributed Proofreading Team at http://www.pgdp.net
(This file was produced from images generously made
available by the Bibliothèque nationale de France
(BnF/Gallica) at http://gallica.bnf.fr)





[Note: Les lettres supérieures unusuelles sont précédées par ^.]




LES RÈGLES DE CICCO SIMONETTA POUR LE DÉCHIFFREMENT DES ÉCRITURES
SECRÈTES

(4 JUILLET 1474).


Le manuscrit italien 1595[1] de la Bibliothèque nationale contient, du
folio 438 au folio 446, des fragments d'un prétendu _diario_ de Cicco
Simonetta, secrétaire et conseiller des trois premiers ducs de Milan de
la dynastie de Sforza[2]. Les folios 438, 439 et 440 sont remplis par
des minutes de comptes; les folios 442, 443, 444, 445, 446, par des
catalogues de livres ou de manuscrits ou des minutes de lettres; enfin
le folio 441 tout entier et le recto du folio 442, par les _Regule ad
extrahendum litteras ziferatas sine exemplo_, qui font la matière du
présent travail. Dans ces fragments, on le voit, il y a un peu de tout,
des notes de toutes sortes plutôt qu'un journal, et la dénomination de
_diario_ qui leur a été assignée, soit par le classificateur, soit par
le possesseur ancien du manuscrit en question, serait tout à fait
impropre, si la plupart d'entre eux n'étaient datés du quantième et du
mois. Quant à leur attribution à Simonetta, elle nous paraît devoir
prêter moins à controverse. D'abord la théorie des règles suivies par la
chancellerie milanaise avait été pendant longtemps l'objet des
méditations de Cicco Simonetta; il avait même préparé, en 1435, un
traité de la chancellerie de François Sforza[3], et nous ne serions pas
surpris que les règles qui nous occupent eussent été tirées de ce
traité, qui n'a jamais été publié. Ce n'est là qu'une présomption en
faveur de l'hypothèse qui fait de Simonetta l'auteur de ces règles; nous
avons en revanche des preuves presque certaines que, si elles ne sont
pas l'oeuvre de Cicco, elles ont du moins été tracées de sa main. En
effet, elles sont de la même écriture que le soi-disant _diario_, et
l'écriture de ces notes présente de telles analogies avec celle des
lettres ou morceaux autographes de Simonetta, conservés dans l'_Archivio
Sforzesco_[4], et avec celle du manuscrit dit de Simonetta[5], regardé
ordinairement comme autographe, qu'on doit les attribuer au même
personnage. Il est vrai que le catalogue de manuscrits, non daté, qui,
sous forme de lettre à Philippe Sacramoro, orateur milanais à Florence,
termine le prétendu _diario_ (fol. 445 v^o et fol. 446 r^o) est signé
_Ja. Poggius_[6]; mais cette signature ne peut être autographe; en
effet, l'écriture de ce catalogue est la même que celle des autres
pièces du _diario_[7]; or, toutes ces pièces sont datées de Pavie ou de
Gallerate et émanent certainement d'un Milanais; de plus, les comptes
qui en font partie (fol. 438, 439 et 440) et qui sont tous relatifs aux
revenus et aux dépenses du royaume de Naples dénotent une connaissance
intime des détails de l'administration et du gouvernement napolitain,
connaissance qui eût pu difficilement être le lot de Jacques Pogge,
tandis qu'elle serait parfaitement celui de Simonetta, ancien serviteur
du roi de Naples. Somme toute, l'attribution à ce dernier du _diario_ et
par suite des _regule_, exception faite toutefois pour le catalogue de
manuscrits signé de Pogge, nous paraît devoir être provisoirement admise
à défaut d'une meilleure à proposer.

    [Note 1: Ce ms. forme le t. XIII de la collection connue sous le nom
    d'_Archivio Sforzesco_ (ms. ital. 1583-1615), cédée en 1867 par M.
    Costa de Beauregard à la Bibl. nat. (Delisle, _le Cabinet des
    manuscrits de la Bibliothèque nationale_, t. II, p. 313). M.
    Mazzatinti a donné un dépouillement sommaire, mais presque complet,
    de l'_Archivio Sforzesco_, dans l'_Archivio storico lombardo_,
    Milano, 1883, p. 222 et ss., et 1885, p. 657 et ss.]

    [Note 2: Sur cet éminent personnage, qui fut disgracié en 1479 et
    mis à mort le 30 octobre 1480, voir Argelati, _Bibliotheca
    scriptorum mediolanensium_, Milan, 1745, t. II, col. 2166-168, et la
    biographie qui lui a été consacrée par Carlo Belgiojoso en tête de
    l'édition de son drame intitulé: _Cicco Simonetta_, Milano, 1858,
    in-8^o. De nombreuses lettres adressées à Cicco Simonetta par
    différentes personnes sont conservées à la Bibl. nat., ms. ital.
    1590. Voir aussi _Diarium Parmense_, dans Muratori. _Rerum
    italicarum scriptores_, t. XXII, col. 249 et ss.; _Mémoires de
    Commynes_, éd. Dupont, t. II, p. 302 et 303; Litta, _Fam. Simonetta
    di Calabria_, etc.]

    [Note 3: Ce traité, intitulé: _Constitutiones et ordines cancellariæ
    secretioris illustrissimi principis et excellentissimi d. d.
    Francisci Sfortiæ Vicecomitis ducis Mediolani_, etc., appartenait,
    au temps d'Argelati (_op. cit._, II, col. 2167), à l'avocat Sitone:
    nous ne savons pas ce qu'il est devenu.]

    [Note 4: Lodi, 18 décembre 1449. Cicco Simonetta au duc de Milan
    (Bibl. nat., ms. ital. 1585, fol. 106).--Milan, 2 octobre 1455. Le
    même à frère Jacques de Pesaro à Naples (Bibl. nat., ms. ital.,
    1587, fol. 76).--4 mars 1456. Relatio facta per me Cicchum
    magnificis dominis de consilio secreto parte Ill^mi domini domini
    nostri (_ibid._, fol. 109). Voy. aussi les lettres ducales
    contresignées par Simonetta, par exemple Bibl. nat., ms. ital. 1595,
    fol. 296.--Milan, 14 juillet 1462. Le duc de Milan à Laurent de
    Pesaro, conseiller à Parme; _ibid._, fol. 30.--Milan, 11 février
    1463. Le même aux maîtres des entrées, etc.]

    [Note 5: Bibl. nat., ms. lat. 10133. Une copie de ce manuscrit, qui
    n'est autre qu'un recueil des documents relatifs aux rapports des
    ducs de Milan avec la France depuis 1461, appartenait, suivant
    Argelati (_op. cit._, II, col. 2167), au comte Antoine Simonetta,
    descendant d'un frère de Cicco: nous ignorons le sort de cette
    transcription. Nous préparons une notice sur le ms. lat. 10133.]

    [Note 6: Il s'agit sans doute de Jacques Pogge (1441-1478),
    secrétaire du cardinal Riario; compromis dans la conjuration des
    Pazzi, il fut exécuté. Il était fils de Pogge, le grand humaniste.]

    [Note 7: L'examen d'un autographe de Pogge confirmerait probablement
    notre assertion: mais nous n'avons pu en trouver un dans les
    bibliothèques de Paris. Quant au fac-similé inséré par M. de Nolhac
    dans son bel ouvrage: _la Bibliothèque de Fulvio Orsini_, Paris,
    1887, c'est celui d'un autographe de Jacques Pogge l'ancien.]

D'ailleurs cette discussion n'a, suivant nous, qu'un intérêt secondaire;
ce qu'il importe, c'est d'étudier les règles de Simonetta elles-mêmes de
façon à définir leur nature et à déterminer leur but et leur utilité.

Elles ont été rédigées à Pavie le lundi 4 juillet 1474. Cette date est
digne de remarque, car c'est le moment où les correspondances chiffrées
commencèrent à prendre de l'extension en Italie. En effet, l'usage de la
cryptographie, qui remonterait à l'antiquité la plus reculée, qui aurait
été commun chez les Grecs[8] et les Romains[9], dont les documents
wisigothiques offrent de nombreux spécimens[10], dont on rencontre aux
archives de Venise deux ou trois exemples du XIIIe siècle[11] et
plusieurs du XIVe[12], ne devint pas général en Italie avant le courant
du XVe[13]; mais alors les écritures secrètes se multiplient. Toutefois
à cette époque, qui est comme l'enfance de l'art cryptographique, tous
les systèmes d'écriture secrète dérivent du même principe; les noms
propres de personnes, de lieux ou de pays sont représentés par des mots
ou des signes particuliers; pour les noms communs, chaque lettre de
l'alphabet répond à un signe ou deux; ces signes sont tantôt des
lettres, isolées ou accouplées, dont l'ordre est interverti ou la valeur
changée, tantôt des chiffres isolés ou accouplés, tantôt des caractères
bizarres et de pure fantaisie au choix desquels l'imagination des
correspondants a seule présidé; enfin ces lettres, ces chiffres ou ces
caractères sont accompagnés de ce qu'on nomme en cryptographie des
_non-valeurs_, c'est-à-dire de signes nuls, qui n'ont pas de sens et ne
sont introduits dans le texte qu'en vue de dépister les curieux[14].
Déjà, cependant, les accents, les points, les virgules, les
apostrophes, tous les signes qui pourraient aider au déchiffrement sont
supprimés[15]; le plus souvent les mots ne sont pas séparés[16].

    [Note 8: Bibliophile Jacob, _la Cryptographie_, Paris, 1858, p. 6 et
    ss.]

    [Note 9: Paoli, _Programma scolastico di paleografia latina e di
    diplomatica. 1. Paleografia latina_, Firenze, 1888, p. 40. Il ne
    faut pas confondre la tachygraphie ou sténographie des Romains avec
    la cryptographie: la tachygraphie est à peu près à la cryptographie
    ce que la sténographie est à l'écriture ordinaire. (Voy. Kopp,
    _Paleographia critica_, Mannheim, 1817, 2 vol. in-4^o; Wailly,
    _Éléments de paléographie_, I, 425; et surtout le mémoire de M.
    Julien Havet sur l'_Écriture secrète de Gerbert_, lu à l'Académie
    des inscriptions et belles-lettres, le 11 mars 1887, et publié dans
    le t. XV, 4e série, des _Comptes-rendus_ de ce corps.)]

    [Note 10: Paoli, _op. cit._, p. 41, d'après Muños y Rivero,
    _Paleographia visigoda_, Madrid, 1881, p. 77.]

    [Note 11: Pasini, _Delle scritture in cifra usate dalla republica
    veneta_, dans _Il R. Archivio generale di Venezia_, Venezia, 1873,
    p. 292.]

    [Note 12: _Ibid._, p. 292 et 293.]

    [Note 13: Le plus vieux document véritablement cryptographique que
    possèdent les archives de Venise est du 28 juin 1411 (Senato,
    Deliberazione secrete, t. IV, fol. 184 v^o): sur 36 lignes
    d'écriture, 29 sont en chiffres (Pasini, _op. cit._, p. 300). L'acte
    le plus ancien en écriture secrète conservé à Florence est de 1414
    (_Dispacci in cifre del R. archivio di stato di Firenze_, dans
    _Archivio storico italiano_, 3e série, t. XIV, p. 473, Firenze,
    1871). À Milan, le plus ancien paraît être de 1454 et à Gênes de
    1481 (R. Sovrintendenza agli archivi veneti, _L'Archivio di stato in
    Venezia negli anni 1876-1880_, Venezia, 1881, p. 64-67. Voir aussi
    Cecchetti, _Le scritture occulte nella diplomazia veneziana_, dans
    _Memorie del R. istituto veneto di scienze, lettere ed arti_, 3e
    série, t. IV, Venezia, 1869, p. 1185-1211).]

    [Note 14: _Dispacci in cifre_, etc., dans _Arch. stor. ital._, _loc.
    cit._, p. 475; Pasini, _op. cit._, p. 300. On trouvera les clefs de
    chiffres de ce genre et de l'année 1465 à la Bibl. nat. (ms. ital.
    1591, fol. 132, 133, 134, et 1592, fol. 29). Un chiffre analogue,
    mais du XVIe siècle, a été reproduit par M. L. Paris dans les
    _Négociations, lettres et pièces diverses relatives au règne de
    François II_, Paris, 1841 (Collection de documents inédits), en
    regard de la page XVI. Nous n'insistons pas sur ces clefs, dont le
    but est tout différent des règles que nous étudions: ces clefs ont
    été dressées afin de déchiffrer une lettre secrète déterminée ou un
    alphabet déterminé, tandis que les règles de Simonetta visent à
    indiquer une méthode pour découvrir ces clefs elles-mêmes. Les clefs
    pareilles à celles que nous avons citées, mais de temps postérieurs,
    ne sont pas rares. Les archives de Venise en conservent plus de 400
    des XVIe, XVIIe et XVIIIe siècles (Pasini, _op. cit._, p. 291). De
    plus, quelques cryptographes exercés en ont restitué un certain
    nombre; ainsi l'abbé Gabrielli, à Florence, en a rétabli plus de
    1,300 (voy. l'article déjà signalé de l'_Arch. stor. ital._).
    Pasini, à Venise, a déchiffré près de 800 dépêches (R.
    Sovrintendenza agli archivi veneti, _op. cit._, p. 64 et 202, et
    _id._, _Gli archivii della regione veneta_, Venezia, 1881, t. II, p.
    195). Cf. les cinq clefs publiées à l'appendice de ce volume. Ces
    déchiffrements ne vont pas sans donner lieu à des interprétations
    diverses. Voir à ce sujet la curieuse dissertation de Pasini, _I
    dispacci di Giovanni Michiel ambasciatore veneto in Inghilterra
    (1554-1557), deciferati da Paolo Friedmann, rettificazioni ed
    aggiunte_, Venezia, 1869.]

    [Note 15: Pasini, _Delle scritture in cifra_, etc., _loc. cit._, p.
    291.]

    [Note 16: _Ibid._, voy. la table qui fait suite au mémoire de Pasini
    et qui n'est que le fac-similé d'une partie de la pièce de 1411
    mentionnée plus haut.]

C'est à cet état arriéré de la science cryptographique que s'appliquent
les règles ou mieux les instructions de Simonetta; elles sont au nombre
de treize et, bien entendu, ainsi que l'atteste le titre que l'auteur
leur a donné, elles ne prétendent qu'à fournir des procédés pratiques,
fruit sans doute de son expérience personnelle et dont il voulait faire
profiter les secrétaires de la chancellerie milanaise, propres à
dévoiler l'alphabet ou la clef d'une dépêche écrite en lettres
interverties, en chiffres ou en caractères conventionnels.

Bien que Simonetta semble avoir eu quelque notion des chiffres à
alphabet double, il ne se préoccupe que des chiffres à alphabet simple,
c'est-à-dire de ceux où le même signe représente toujours la même
lettre, méthode rudimentaire où la lettre la plus répétée dans l'idiome
du texte cryptographique ou cryptogramme ne peut rester longtemps
dissimulée[17]. Presque tout son système repose sur la recherche des
voyelles[18].

    [Note 17: Pour le français, c'est la lettre _e_. Voir:
    _Cryptographie_, étude publiée dans le journal _le Génie civil_
    (mai-juin 1888), par le marquis de Viaris (p. 6). Nous devons à
    l'obligeance de l'auteur la communication de cet excellent ouvrage,
    auquel nous empruntons la plupart des détails qui précèdent, entre
    autres la définition des alphabets simples et des alphabets
    multiples. Ce tirage à part n'est malheureusement pas livré au
    commerce. Voir aussi: Kerckhoffs (Aug.), _la Cryptographie militaire
    ou des chiffres usités en temps de guerre, avec un nouveau procédé
    de déchiffrement applicable aux systèmes à double clef_, Paris,
    1883, p. 19.]

    [Note 18: Cette recherche fut plus tard le fondement du système de
    déchiffrement de Porta (_De furtivis litterarum notis_, Naples,
    1563), dont le bibliophile Jacob (_op. cit._, p. 56 et ss.) a donné
    une analyse circonstanciée. De nos jours, un cryptographe distingué
    et original, M. Vesin de Romanini, a repris cette idée en la
    développant et en a fait la base de son traité de cryptographie
    intitulé: _la Cryptographie dévoilée, ou Art de traduire ou de
    déchiffrer toutes les écritures en quelque caractère et en quelque
    langue que ce soit, quoiqu'on ne connaisse ni ce caractère ni cette
    langue, appliquée aux langues française, allemande, anglaise,
    latine, italienne, espagnole_, etc. Paris, 1857. Pour la langue
    italienne, voir p. 163 et ss.]

Les trois premiers préceptes, par l'examen de la lettre finale de chaque
mot, par celui des monogrammes, des digrammes et des trigrammes, roulent
sur les moyens de distinguer si le texte à déchiffrer est en latin ou en
langue vulgaire, c'est-à-dire en italien. La découverte en cette
dernière langue de la voyelle _e_, de la labiale _l_ dans les digrammes
et du relatif _che_ dans les trigrammes forme l'objet du 4e, du 5e et du
6e conseil. Passant ensuite au latin, auquel il consacre les règles 7,
8, 9, 10, 11 et 12, Simonetta observe que les mots de cette langue sont
terminés le plus communément par _s_, _m_ ou _t_, ou _a_, _e_, _i_ et
_o_. Si un signe est employé seul, on peut être sûr que c'est une
voyelle, et, selon toute vraisemblance, la préposition _a_, qui est le
monogramme le plus usité. Quant aux digrammes, il transcrit la liste des
plus usuels; ce sera à la sagacité du lecteur à les interpréter. Les
trigrammes dont la première lettre est la même que la troisième
correspondront à _non_, _sis_, etc., mais plutôt à _non_, le trigramme
le plus fréquent. Un signe répété trois fois sans intervalle doit être
un _u_. Dans les mots de quatre lettres, un chiffre redoublé équivaudra,
selon toute probabilité, à _l_ ou à _s_, comme dans _ille_, _esse_, etc.

La dernière observation est commune au latin et à l'italien: un chiffre
ou un signe toujours suivi du même chiffre ou du même signe figurera
_q_; le second sera _u_, et le suivant une autre voyelle.

En finissant, Simonetta remarque, toutefois, que ces règles peuvent
facilement être mises en défaut, pour peu que l'auteur de la dépêche ait
soin de varier et de compliquer les chiffres de diverses manières, soit
en intercalant au milieu d'eux, comme nous l'avons dit, des caractères,
des monogrammes, des digrammes ou des trigrammes nuls, soit en se
servant de deux alphabets à la fois, etc.

L'intention de Simonetta en recueillant ces règles n'a pas été, on s'en
aperçoit, de composer un traité théorique et complet de cryptographie.
Son but est plus modeste; les destinant, comme nous le disions plus
haut, à satisfaire aux exigences courantes des chancelleries, il les a
basées sur l'expérience seule; c'était du reste inévitable; au XVe
siècle, cette science ou cet art n'avait pas encore fait de progrès
considérables; les combinaisons, à peu près inextricables[19], qui
devaient le transformer sous l'impulsion de Trithème[20], de Porta[21],
de Blaise de Vigenère[22], le créateur des alphabets multiples[23], et
des cryptographes du XIXe siècle[24], n'étaient pas encore inventées.
Notre auteur ne suppose pas de plus grande difficulté que l'alphabet
double et ne soupçonne pas les méthodes à alphabets multiples[25], à
anagramme ou à interversion[26] et à répertoire[27]. Cependant, quelque
élémentaires et imparfaites que soient ces règles, quoique tout esprit
attentif et réfléchi puisse les déduire sans aucun secours étranger,
elles nous ont paru mériter d'être publiées; on y trouve en effet réunis
et coordonnés les préceptes les plus indispensables et les plus
commodes, en raison de leur empirisme même, pour le déchiffrement des
dépêches italiennes du XVe siècle dont les clefs sont perdues ou n'ont
pas été rétablies, et à ce titre leur publication pourra peut-être
rendre quelques services aux personnes qui ont à lire ou à copier des
documents de ce genre.

                                             P.-M. PERRET.

    [Note 19: Sur les traits caractéristiques des dépêches chiffrées du
    XVIIe et du XVIIIe siècle, voir l'article déjà mentionné de l'_Arch.
    stor. ital._, t. XIV, 3e série, p. 473.]

    [Note 20: _Steganographia_, Francfort, 1606. Le bibliophile Jacob
    (_op. cit._, p. 38 et ss.) a consacré à cet ouvrage une analyse
    détaillée.]

    [Note 21: Voy. plus haut, p. 520, note 4.]

    [Note 22: _Traité des chiffres ou secrettes manieres d'écrire_,
    Paris, 1587.]

    [Note 23: M. de Viaris (_op. cit._, p. 7) a reproduit des types de
    ces alphabets multiples. Voy. aussi le Bibliophile Jacob, _op.
    cit._, p. 71, et Kerckhoffs, _op. cit._, p. 30.]

    [Note 24: Leurs traités sont très nombreux. Nous nous contenterons
    d'indiquer quelques-uns des principaux: Mamert Gallien,
    _Dictionnaire télégraphique, économique et secret_, Paris,
    1874.--Simonot (Edme), _l'Art de déchiffrer les écritures secrètes_,
    Paris, 1881.--Kerckhoffs, _op. cit._--Sittler, _Dictionnaire
    abréviatif chiffré_, Paris, 1889 (10e édition), etc., etc.--Pour les
    ouvrages relatifs à la cryptographie et antérieurs à 1858, on
    consultera avec profit la bibliographie que le bibliophile Jacob a
    mise en appendice a son livre déjà cité (p. 242-251).]

    [Note 25: Viaris, _op. cit._, p. 6.]

    [Note 26: _Ibid._, p. 22.]

    [Note 27: _Ibid._, p. 44.]




                                        Papie die lune iiii julii 1474.

REGULE AD EXTRAHENDUM LITTERAS ZIFERATAS SINE EXEMPLO.


(1.) Primo, inspiciendum est utrum littera sit in latino an in vulgari,
quod hoc modo scietur: consydera utrum dictiones littere proposite
habeant solum quinque terminationes diversas aut pauciores, vel plures:
si quidem fuerint solum quinque vel pauciores, estima quod littera illa
sit in vulgari: si vero fuerint plures quinque, estima quod littera
proposita sit in latino; et hoc quia omnes dictiones vulgares in
idiomate nostro terminantur in vocalem, et vocales sunt quinque, _a_,
_e_, _i_, _o_, _u_. Si vero dictiones littere proposite habuerint plures
terminationes quam quinque, estima quod littera proposita sit in latino;
et hoc quia dictiones latine seu litterales possunt terminari in
vocalem, semivocalem, scilicet _l_, _m_, _n_, _r_, _s_, _x_, et mutam,
scilicet _b_, _c_, _d_, _f_, _g_, _k_, _q_, _p_, _t_.

(2.) Alia regula, ad idem scilicet cognoscendum, utrum littera proposita
sit in vulgari vel in latino seu littera. Inspice litteram propositam
utrum in ea multiplicentur seu frequententur dictiones representate
solum per unam zifram; quia si sit, verisimile est litteram propositam
esse in vulgari; et hoc quia in vulgari dictiones representate per unam
zifram tantum multum frequentantur, sed in latino seu littera raro, cum
in latino non sint dictiones representate per unicam litteram vel zifram
nisi quatuor, scilicet _e_, _a_ propositiones, _o_ adverbium vocandi et
_i_ verbum imperativum: que dictiones monolittere raro ponuntur in
litteris preter _a_ prepositionem.

(3.) Item. Consydera litteram propositam si in ea multiplicantur et
frequentantur dictiones duarum vel trium litterarum vel zifrarum, et
tunc consydera quod littera proposita sit in vulgari; et hoc, quia
hujusmodi dictiones magis replicantur in vulgari quam in latino.

(4.) Posteaquam igitur per regulas premissas tibi paruerit quod littera
proposita fuerit in vulgari, vel quod fuerit in latino vel littera, si
fuerit in vulgari jam certus eris que zifre tibi representant vocales,
non terminate tamen sed confuse, et hoc quia zifre que sunt in fine
dictionum semper sunt vocales in idiomate totius Italie; cum autem tibi
note fuerint vocales per hunc modum nunc dictum, consydera que zifra ex
zifris repertis in fine dictionum frequentius repetitur in dictionibus
monosillabis et unius littere seu unius zifre tantum, quia possibile est
et satis verisimile quod talis zifra representet _e_; et hoc quia hoc
verbum est substantivum et per consequens _e_ multum frequentatur et
repetitur in litteris vulgaribus et similiter hec conjunctio copulativa
et per consequens _e_.

(5.) (Fol. 441 v^o.) Item. Multum consyderande sunt dictiones duarum
zifrarum tantum in litteris vulgaribus, quia multe ex eis incipiunt ab
_l_; et hoc propter articulos qui apponuntur nominibus appellativis,
utputa _lo_ et _la_ in singulari, et _li_ et _le_ in plurali.

(6.) Item. Consyderande sunt dictiones trium zifrarum tantum et si
aliqua talis sepe repetitur in littera proposita; et hoc quia hec dictio
_che_ sepe repetitur in litteris vulgaribus.

(7.) Si vero apparuerit tibi quod littera proposita sit in latino et non
in vulgari, tunc consydera zifras que sunt in fine dictionum et que ex
eis maxime repetuntur, quia verisimile est tales esse aut vocales, aut
_s_, aut _m_, aut _t_; et hoc quia maxima pars dictionum latinarum
desinunt aut in vocalem, aut in _s_, aut in _m_, aut in _t_, et pauce ex
ex (_sic_) eis finiunt in mutam preterquam in _t_, preter _ab_, _ad_ et
_quod_, que satis frequentantur in litteris.

(8.) Alia regula. Consydera litteram propositam, si in ea est aliqua
dictio representata per unicam zifram, et conjectura quod illa zifra sit
_a_, quia in litteris que sunt in latino raro contingunt dictiones unius
littere tantum preter _a_ prepositionem, ut supra dictum est.

(9.) Alia regula. Consydera zifras que sunt in fine dictionum, que, ut
dictum est, frequenter representant aliquam vocalium, aut _s_ et _m_,
aut _t_, et vide si aliquam ex eis inveneris in dictionibus unius aut
duarum zifrarum, quia si fuerit in dictione unius zifre, tunc talis
zifra representat unam vocalium, quia nulla dictio ideo nec syllaba
potest esse sine vocali, et illa vocalis erit aut _a_, aut _e_, aut _i_,
aut _o_; sed verisimilius est quod sit _a_ prepositio, ut dictum est
supra. Si vero fuerit in dictione duarum zifrarum, tunc discurre per
mentem tuam omnes dictiones duarum litterarum tantum et eas maxime que
ut frequenter occurrunt in litteris, sicut _et_, _ut_, _ad_, _si_, _me_,
_te_ et _se_. Et ut non te lateat, hic ponam omnes dictiones duarum
litterarum tantum vel maximam partem earum, et sunt: _ab_, _ac_, _ad_,
_an_ et _at_, _da_, _de_ et _do_, _ea_, _ei_, _eo_, _et_, _ex_ et _es_,
_he_, _hi_, _id_, _ii_, _in_, _ir_, _is_ et _it_, _me_, _mi_, _na_, _ne_
et _ni_, _ob_, _os_, _re_, _se_ et _si_, _tu_, _te_, _ve_, _vi_ et _ut_.

(10.) Alia regula. Consydera si in littera proposita sint dictiones
trium zifrarum tantum quarum prima sit eadem vel similis ultime, quia
forte talis dictio erit _non_, que sepe occurrit in litteris, aut _sis_
vel _ibi_; et tu discurre per alias dictiones trium litterarum quarum
prima sit similis ultime, sicut sunt: _ala_, _ama_, _ana_, _ara_, _ede_,
_eme_, _ere_, _che_, _ixi_, _ivi_.

(11.) (Fol. 442.) Alia regula. Consydera si in littera proposita sit
aliqua dictio vel dictiones in qua vel quibus sit aliqua zifra
triplicata absque intervallo, quia talis zifra representat _u_, ut
_mula_ (_sic_ pour _uvula_?).

(12.) Alia regula. Consydera si in littera proposita est aliqua zifra
geminata et maxime in dictionibus quatuorum (_sic_) zifrarum, quia
fortasse talis zifra representabit _l_ vel _s_ qui ut frequenter
geminantur, ut _esse_ et _ille_.

(13.) Alia regula et ultima, communis tam in litteris vulgaribus quam
latinis. Consydera si in littera proposita est aliqua zifra ad quam
semper et ubique sequatur una et eadem zifra, quia talis zifra
representat _q_, et alia sequens representat _u_, quia semper post _q_
sequitur _u_, et zifra que sequitur zifram representantem _u_ semper est
vocalis, quia semper post _q_ sequitur _u_, et post _u_ sequitur alia
vocalis.

Possunt tamen predicte regule decludi (_sic_) multipliciter, utputa
scribendo per zifras partim litteram in vulgari et partim in latino;
item interponendo et apponendo in littera zifras nullas litteras
representantes et maxime dictionibus unius vel duarum aut trium zifrarum
vel litterarum; item scribendo cum duobus alphabetis zifrarum omnino
diversis; item ponendo unam zifram solam loco _q_ et _u_.

(Extrait de la _Bibliothèque de l'École des chartes_, tome LI, 1890.)

Nogent-le-Rotrou, imprimerie DAUPELEY-GOUVERNEUR.





End of the Project Gutenberg EBook of Les règles de Cicco Simonetta, by 
Francesco Simonetta

*** END OF THIS PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK LES RÈGLES DE CICCO SIMONETTA ***

***** This file should be named 28227-8.txt or 28227-8.zip *****
This and all associated files of various formats will be found in:
        http://www.gutenberg.org/2/8/2/2/28227/

Produced by Laurent Vogel, Christine P. Travers and the
Online Distributed Proofreading Team at http://www.pgdp.net
(This file was produced from images generously made
available by the Bibliothèque nationale de France
(BnF/Gallica) at http://gallica.bnf.fr)


Updated editions will replace the previous one--the old editions
will be renamed.

Creating the works from public domain print editions means that no
one owns a United States copyright in these works, so the Foundation
(and you!) can copy and distribute it in the United States without
permission and without paying copyright royalties.  Special rules,
set forth in the General Terms of Use part of this license, apply to
copying and distributing Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works to
protect the PROJECT GUTENBERG-tm concept and trademark.  Project
Gutenberg is a registered trademark, and may not be used if you
charge for the eBooks, unless you receive specific permission.  If you
do not charge anything for copies of this eBook, complying with the
rules is very easy.  You may use this eBook for nearly any purpose
such as creation of derivative works, reports, performances and
research.  They may be modified and printed and given away--you may do
practically ANYTHING with public domain eBooks.  Redistribution is
subject to the trademark license, especially commercial
redistribution.



*** START: FULL LICENSE ***

THE FULL PROJECT GUTENBERG LICENSE
PLEASE READ THIS BEFORE YOU DISTRIBUTE OR USE THIS WORK

To protect the Project Gutenberg-tm mission of promoting the free
distribution of electronic works, by using or distributing this work
(or any other work associated in any way with the phrase "Project
Gutenberg"), you agree to comply with all the terms of the Full Project
Gutenberg-tm License (available with this file or online at
http://gutenberg.org/license).


Section 1.  General Terms of Use and Redistributing Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic works

1.A.  By reading or using any part of this Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic work, you indicate that you have read, understand, agree to
and accept all the terms of this license and intellectual property
(trademark/copyright) agreement.  If you do not agree to abide by all
the terms of this agreement, you must cease using and return or destroy
all copies of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works in your possession.
If you paid a fee for obtaining a copy of or access to a Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic work and you do not agree to be bound by the
terms of this agreement, you may obtain a refund from the person or
entity to whom you paid the fee as set forth in paragraph 1.E.8.

1.B.  "Project Gutenberg" is a registered trademark.  It may only be
used on or associated in any way with an electronic work by people who
agree to be bound by the terms of this agreement.  There are a few
things that you can do with most Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works
even without complying with the full terms of this agreement.  See
paragraph 1.C below.  There are a lot of things you can do with Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic works if you follow the terms of this agreement
and help preserve free future access to Project Gutenberg-tm electronic
works.  See paragraph 1.E below.

1.C.  The Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation ("the Foundation"
or PGLAF), owns a compilation copyright in the collection of Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic works.  Nearly all the individual works in the
collection are in the public domain in the United States.  If an
individual work is in the public domain in the United States and you are
located in the United States, we do not claim a right to prevent you from
copying, distributing, performing, displaying or creating derivative
works based on the work as long as all references to Project Gutenberg
are removed.  Of course, we hope that you will support the Project
Gutenberg-tm mission of promoting free access to electronic works by
freely sharing Project Gutenberg-tm works in compliance with the terms of
this agreement for keeping the Project Gutenberg-tm name associated with
the work.  You can easily comply with the terms of this agreement by
keeping this work in the same format with its attached full Project
Gutenberg-tm License when you share it without charge with others.

1.D.  The copyright laws of the place where you are located also govern
what you can do with this work.  Copyright laws in most countries are in
a constant state of change.  If you are outside the United States, check
the laws of your country in addition to the terms of this agreement
before downloading, copying, displaying, performing, distributing or
creating derivative works based on this work or any other Project
Gutenberg-tm work.  The Foundation makes no representations concerning
the copyright status of any work in any country outside the United
States.

1.E.  Unless you have removed all references to Project Gutenberg:

1.E.1.  The following sentence, with active links to, or other immediate
access to, the full Project Gutenberg-tm License must appear prominently
whenever any copy of a Project Gutenberg-tm work (any work on which the
phrase "Project Gutenberg" appears, or with which the phrase "Project
Gutenberg" is associated) is accessed, displayed, performed, viewed,
copied or distributed:

This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere at no cost and with
almost no restrictions whatsoever.  You may copy it, give it away or
re-use it under the terms of the Project Gutenberg License included
with this eBook or online at www.gutenberg.org

1.E.2.  If an individual Project Gutenberg-tm electronic work is derived
from the public domain (does not contain a notice indicating that it is
posted with permission of the copyright holder), the work can be copied
and distributed to anyone in the United States without paying any fees
or charges.  If you are redistributing or providing access to a work
with the phrase "Project Gutenberg" associated with or appearing on the
work, you must comply either with the requirements of paragraphs 1.E.1
through 1.E.7 or obtain permission for the use of the work and the
Project Gutenberg-tm trademark as set forth in paragraphs 1.E.8 or
1.E.9.

1.E.3.  If an individual Project Gutenberg-tm electronic work is posted
with the permission of the copyright holder, your use and distribution
must comply with both paragraphs 1.E.1 through 1.E.7 and any additional
terms imposed by the copyright holder.  Additional terms will be linked
to the Project Gutenberg-tm License for all works posted with the
permission of the copyright holder found at the beginning of this work.

1.E.4.  Do not unlink or detach or remove the full Project Gutenberg-tm
License terms from this work, or any files containing a part of this
work or any other work associated with Project Gutenberg-tm.

1.E.5.  Do not copy, display, perform, distribute or redistribute this
electronic work, or any part of this electronic work, without
prominently displaying the sentence set forth in paragraph 1.E.1 with
active links or immediate access to the full terms of the Project
Gutenberg-tm License.

1.E.6.  You may convert to and distribute this work in any binary,
compressed, marked up, nonproprietary or proprietary form, including any
word processing or hypertext form.  However, if you provide access to or
distribute copies of a Project Gutenberg-tm work in a format other than
"Plain Vanilla ASCII" or other format used in the official version
posted on the official Project Gutenberg-tm web site (www.gutenberg.org),
you must, at no additional cost, fee or expense to the user, provide a
copy, a means of exporting a copy, or a means of obtaining a copy upon
request, of the work in its original "Plain Vanilla ASCII" or other
form.  Any alternate format must include the full Project Gutenberg-tm
License as specified in paragraph 1.E.1.

1.E.7.  Do not charge a fee for access to, viewing, displaying,
performing, copying or distributing any Project Gutenberg-tm works
unless you comply with paragraph 1.E.8 or 1.E.9.

1.E.8.  You may charge a reasonable fee for copies of or providing
access to or distributing Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works provided
that

- You pay a royalty fee of 20% of the gross profits you derive from
     the use of Project Gutenberg-tm works calculated using the method
     you already use to calculate your applicable taxes.  The fee is
     owed to the owner of the Project Gutenberg-tm trademark, but he
     has agreed to donate royalties under this paragraph to the
     Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation.  Royalty payments
     must be paid within 60 days following each date on which you
     prepare (or are legally required to prepare) your periodic tax
     returns.  Royalty payments should be clearly marked as such and
     sent to the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation at the
     address specified in Section 4, "Information about donations to
     the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation."

- You provide a full refund of any money paid by a user who notifies
     you in writing (or by e-mail) within 30 days of receipt that s/he
     does not agree to the terms of the full Project Gutenberg-tm
     License.  You must require such a user to return or
     destroy all copies of the works possessed in a physical medium
     and discontinue all use of and all access to other copies of
     Project Gutenberg-tm works.

- You provide, in accordance with paragraph 1.F.3, a full refund of any
     money paid for a work or a replacement copy, if a defect in the
     electronic work is discovered and reported to you within 90 days
     of receipt of the work.

- You comply with all other terms of this agreement for free
     distribution of Project Gutenberg-tm works.

1.E.9.  If you wish to charge a fee or distribute a Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic work or group of works on different terms than are set
forth in this agreement, you must obtain permission in writing from
both the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation and Michael
Hart, the owner of the Project Gutenberg-tm trademark.  Contact the
Foundation as set forth in Section 3 below.

1.F.

1.F.1.  Project Gutenberg volunteers and employees expend considerable
effort to identify, do copyright research on, transcribe and proofread
public domain works in creating the Project Gutenberg-tm
collection.  Despite these efforts, Project Gutenberg-tm electronic
works, and the medium on which they may be stored, may contain
"Defects," such as, but not limited to, incomplete, inaccurate or
corrupt data, transcription errors, a copyright or other intellectual
property infringement, a defective or damaged disk or other medium, a
computer virus, or computer codes that damage or cannot be read by
your equipment.

1.F.2.  LIMITED WARRANTY, DISCLAIMER OF DAMAGES - Except for the "Right
of Replacement or Refund" described in paragraph 1.F.3, the Project
Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation, the owner of the Project
Gutenberg-tm trademark, and any other party distributing a Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic work under this agreement, disclaim all
liability to you for damages, costs and expenses, including legal
fees.  YOU AGREE THAT YOU HAVE NO REMEDIES FOR NEGLIGENCE, STRICT
LIABILITY, BREACH OF WARRANTY OR BREACH OF CONTRACT EXCEPT THOSE
PROVIDED IN PARAGRAPH F3.  YOU AGREE THAT THE FOUNDATION, THE
TRADEMARK OWNER, AND ANY DISTRIBUTOR UNDER THIS AGREEMENT WILL NOT BE
LIABLE TO YOU FOR ACTUAL, DIRECT, INDIRECT, CONSEQUENTIAL, PUNITIVE OR
INCIDENTAL DAMAGES EVEN IF YOU GIVE NOTICE OF THE POSSIBILITY OF SUCH
DAMAGE.

1.F.3.  LIMITED RIGHT OF REPLACEMENT OR REFUND - If you discover a
defect in this electronic work within 90 days of receiving it, you can
receive a refund of the money (if any) you paid for it by sending a
written explanation to the person you received the work from.  If you
received the work on a physical medium, you must return the medium with
your written explanation.  The person or entity that provided you with
the defective work may elect to provide a replacement copy in lieu of a
refund.  If you received the work electronically, the person or entity
providing it to you may choose to give you a second opportunity to
receive the work electronically in lieu of a refund.  If the second copy
is also defective, you may demand a refund in writing without further
opportunities to fix the problem.

1.F.4.  Except for the limited right of replacement or refund set forth
in paragraph 1.F.3, this work is provided to you 'AS-IS' WITH NO OTHER
WARRANTIES OF ANY KIND, EXPRESS OR IMPLIED, INCLUDING BUT NOT LIMITED TO
WARRANTIES OF MERCHANTIBILITY OR FITNESS FOR ANY PURPOSE.

1.F.5.  Some states do not allow disclaimers of certain implied
warranties or the exclusion or limitation of certain types of damages.
If any disclaimer or limitation set forth in this agreement violates the
law of the state applicable to this agreement, the agreement shall be
interpreted to make the maximum disclaimer or limitation permitted by
the applicable state law.  The invalidity or unenforceability of any
provision of this agreement shall not void the remaining provisions.

1.F.6.  INDEMNITY - You agree to indemnify and hold the Foundation, the
trademark owner, any agent or employee of the Foundation, anyone
providing copies of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works in accordance
with this agreement, and any volunteers associated with the production,
promotion and distribution of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works,
harmless from all liability, costs and expenses, including legal fees,
that arise directly or indirectly from any of the following which you do
or cause to occur: (a) distribution of this or any Project Gutenberg-tm
work, (b) alteration, modification, or additions or deletions to any
Project Gutenberg-tm work, and (c) any Defect you cause.


Section  2.  Information about the Mission of Project Gutenberg-tm

Project Gutenberg-tm is synonymous with the free distribution of
electronic works in formats readable by the widest variety of computers
including obsolete, old, middle-aged and new computers.  It exists
because of the efforts of hundreds of volunteers and donations from
people in all walks of life.

Volunteers and financial support to provide volunteers with the
assistance they need, are critical to reaching Project Gutenberg-tm's
goals and ensuring that the Project Gutenberg-tm collection will
remain freely available for generations to come.  In 2001, the Project
Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation was created to provide a secure
and permanent future for Project Gutenberg-tm and future generations.
To learn more about the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation
and how your efforts and donations can help, see Sections 3 and 4
and the Foundation web page at http://www.pglaf.org.


Section 3.  Information about the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive
Foundation

The Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation is a non profit
501(c)(3) educational corporation organized under the laws of the
state of Mississippi and granted tax exempt status by the Internal
Revenue Service.  The Foundation's EIN or federal tax identification
number is 64-6221541.  Its 501(c)(3) letter is posted at
http://pglaf.org/fundraising.  Contributions to the Project Gutenberg
Literary Archive Foundation are tax deductible to the full extent
permitted by U.S. federal laws and your state's laws.

The Foundation's principal office is located at 4557 Melan Dr. S.
Fairbanks, AK, 99712., but its volunteers and employees are scattered
throughout numerous locations.  Its business office is located at
809 North 1500 West, Salt Lake City, UT 84116, (801) 596-1887, email
business@pglaf.org.  Email contact links and up to date contact
information can be found at the Foundation's web site and official
page at http://pglaf.org

For additional contact information:
     Dr. Gregory B. Newby
     Chief Executive and Director
     gbnewby@pglaf.org


Section 4.  Information about Donations to the Project Gutenberg
Literary Archive Foundation

Project Gutenberg-tm depends upon and cannot survive without wide
spread public support and donations to carry out its mission of
increasing the number of public domain and licensed works that can be
freely distributed in machine readable form accessible by the widest
array of equipment including outdated equipment.  Many small donations
($1 to $5,000) are particularly important to maintaining tax exempt
status with the IRS.

The Foundation is committed to complying with the laws regulating
charities and charitable donations in all 50 states of the United
States.  Compliance requirements are not uniform and it takes a
considerable effort, much paperwork and many fees to meet and keep up
with these requirements.  We do not solicit donations in locations
where we have not received written confirmation of compliance.  To
SEND DONATIONS or determine the status of compliance for any
particular state visit http://pglaf.org

While we cannot and do not solicit contributions from states where we
have not met the solicitation requirements, we know of no prohibition
against accepting unsolicited donations from donors in such states who
approach us with offers to donate.

International donations are gratefully accepted, but we cannot make
any statements concerning tax treatment of donations received from
outside the United States.  U.S. laws alone swamp our small staff.

Please check the Project Gutenberg Web pages for current donation
methods and addresses.  Donations are accepted in a number of other
ways including checks, online payments and credit card donations.
To donate, please visit: http://pglaf.org/donate


Section 5.  General Information About Project Gutenberg-tm electronic
works.

Professor Michael S. Hart is the originator of the Project Gutenberg-tm
concept of a library of electronic works that could be freely shared
with anyone.  For thirty years, he produced and distributed Project
Gutenberg-tm eBooks with only a loose network of volunteer support.


Project Gutenberg-tm eBooks are often created from several printed
editions, all of which are confirmed as Public Domain in the U.S.
unless a copyright notice is included.  Thus, we do not necessarily
keep eBooks in compliance with any particular paper edition.


Most people start at our Web site which has the main PG search facility:

     http://www.gutenberg.org

This Web site includes information about Project Gutenberg-tm,
including how to make donations to the Project Gutenberg Literary
Archive Foundation, how to help produce our new eBooks, and how to
subscribe to our email newsletter to hear about new eBooks.
